RFC/Spec: spec for AAEL and CoCo Event Types (#792)
confidential-containers/trustee: kbs/docs/confidential-containers-eventlog.md

performed on the designated PCR register. When the platform provides a (v)TPM interface, the PCR register corresponds
to the (v)TPM's PCR register. On a platform that is solely TEE, PCR is mapped to a specific [Confidential Computing event log Measurement Register (CCMR)](https://uefi.org/specs/UEFI/2.10/38_Confidential_Computing.html#virtual-platform-cc-event-log)
according to platform-specific rules. This mapping ensures AAEL has applicability even outside TEE scenarios.

2. AAEL Log Entry Format

AAEL log entries consist of two types: Event Entry and INIT Entry. 

__INIT Entry__ is recorded only once at the beginning of AAEL when AA first initializes, capturing the current value of a specific PCR, formatted as

```
INIT/<hash-algorithm> <hex-digest>
```
Where,
- `<hash-algorithm>`: may be `sha256`, `sha384`, or `sha512`.
- `<hex-digest>` is the base16-encoded PCR register value. The length MUST be aligned with the `<hash-algorithm>`. Padding with zeros or truncation MUST be applied if necessary to align with the digest length.

__Event Entry__ records specific events in the format
```

> <Domain> <Operation> <Content>

Reviewer: Is this terminated by a newline character?

Author: Yes. With LF ('\n', '0x0A') without any CR ('\r', `0x0D`)

Author: Added detail

```

Where,
- `Domain`: the event domain, RECOMMENDED to be a URI.
- `Operation`: the specific operation within the domain.

> - `Content`: detailed context of the operation.

Reviewer: I assume each field needs to be present in a record, maybe it's worth to spell this out.

Is it impractical to write "context" without whitespaces? (or is that a typo?)

in the below example it's json. this one happens to have no whitespace, but since we didn't define any escaping rules any json that contains whitespaces in the payload would be invalid e.g.:`{"user-policy":"My policy"}`

Author: We previously considered not allowing any spaces. However, this may make some scenarios unfeasible, such as the one you mentioned.

We can make some adaptations, put the requirement of no spaces at the Domain and Operation levels, and then use the content after the space of Operation until the first \n character as the Content field content.

Reviewer: this will also imply constraints on json content (what if you have `{"my-key":"hello\nworld"}`?). If we use delimiters for structure and a free content field then there have to be escaping rules.

Author: It's a legal one.

Yes, "\n" can be two characters, the escaped slash '\' and the letter 'n'; or a single the newline character '\n'. I think the main reason here is because we want to "print" it out, so the discussion of escape is involved. 
Your example here actually is what is already "printed out", which means that this is a newline character instead of two characters. In fact, the underlying event `Vec<u8>` of `{"my-key":"hello\nworld"}` is
```
[123, 34, 109, 121, 45, 107, 101, 121, 34, 58, 34, 104, 101, 108, 108, 111, 10, 119, 111, 114, 108, 100, 34, 125]
```
that means
```
['{', '"', 'm', 'y', '-', 'k', 'e', 'y', '"', ':', '"', 'h', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o', '\n', 'w', 'o', 'r', 'l', 'd', '"', '}']
```

rather than
```
['{', '"', 'm', 'y', '-', 'k', 'e', 'y', '"', '：', '"', 'h', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o', '\', 'n', 'w', 'o', 'r', 'l', 'd', '"', '}']
```

But usually, we hardly discuss printing events, because they are all stored in the underlying storage. The only point is the policy writing in AS, but I think xxx."my-key" = "hello\nworld" is clear enough, and there is no need to consider escaping?

Reviewer: yeah, that's true. it's probably sufficient to state that the 3rd field cannot contain a newline, since it's an event delimiter (but everything else is ok). this is like jsonlines, so it should be ok.

Author: Added https://github.com/confidential-containers/trustee/pull/792/files#diff-1a1c05673aa87e04213810bc7765e1281541efb8eeb70d41afa5c19d8e8021f7R95

> The three fields are separated by spaces. Each field MUST not contain spaces or delimiters and MUST be composed of [printable character](https://www.ascii-code.com/characters/printable-characters).

Reviewer: what is delimiter in this case, I thought space is a delimiter?

Author: Nice catch. I think the definition here is not clear. Let me use [ASCII whitespace ](https://www.ascii-code.com/characters/white-space-characters) instead

> The three fields are defined by the specific application that calls AA to record events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The semantic meaning of the three fields is defined by the specific application that calls AA to record events.
```

# Specification for Attestation Agent Event Log

## Introduction

> The Attestation Agent Eventlog ([AAEL](https://github.com/confidential-containers/guest-components/issues/495)) are introduced to address limitations in existing logging frameworks such as [Confidential Computing Eventlog (CCEL)](https://uefi.org/specs/UEFI/2.10/38_Confidential_Computing.html), which primarily focus on capturing events during OS boot-up. Unlike CCEL, AAEL provides a comprehensive format for logging events that occur within Confidential VMs (CVMs) after the operating system has started. These VMs provide a highly secure and isolated environment crucial for protecting sensitive operations. The AAEL standard ensures that these post-OS events, which can include memory operations, network transactions, filesystem operations and container-related activities, etc, are coherently bound to hardware dynamic measurement registers, tying activities within the Confidential VMs to their secure hardware roots. This enables high integrity and verifiability for operations, greatly enhancing the ability to audit, troubleshoot, and respond to security incidents in confidential computing scenarios occurring post OS startup.

Author: Yes, I had also read a lot of TCG specs, and as far as I know, only `EV_EVENT_TAG` involves recording post-OS events. We once designed a way to align with EV_EVENT_TAG when playing with AAEL.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/80e91c17-d2a5-4cee-aa1c-45bbbc7966cc)

At that time, we learned that the kernel community might integrate eventlog at the kernel level, and the specific format might be different from the [definition](https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TCG_PCClient_PFP_r1p05_05_3feb20.pdf). (I am not sure about the future evolution direction of the event format in the kernel community, whether there will be/whether the TCG format will be supported)

Therefore, we did not implement the layer of AAEL embedded in the underlying Eventlog because we are waiting for the results of the kernel community. 

If, as you said, the kernel does not provide a newly designed eventlog interface, then we can wrap AAEL in TCG's Eventlog, as shown above. However, these only involve low-level storage and representation. For upper-level users of AA and AS, they see parsed AAEL entries, because AAEL entries are more readable and interoperable.

If necessary, we can omit the section on hash calculation method, which might cause confusion.

> The Attestation Agent Eventlog ([AAEL](https://github.com/confidential-containers/guest-components/issues/495)) are introduced to address limitations in existing logging frameworks such as [Confidential Computing Eventlog (CCEL)](https://uefi.org/specs/UEFI/2.10/38_Confidential_Computing.html), which primarily focus on capturing events during OS boot-up. Unlike CCEL, AAEL provides a comprehensive format for logging events that occur within Confidential VMs (CVMs) after the operating system has started. These VMs provide a highly secure and isolated environment crucial for protecting sensitive operations. The AAEL standard ensures that these post-OS events, which can include memory operations, network transactions, filesystem operations and container-related activities, etc, are coherently bound to hardware dynamic measurement registers, tying activities within the Confidential VMs to their secure hardware roots. This enables high integrity and verifiability for operations, greatly enhancing the ability to audit, troubleshoot, and respond to security incidents in confidential computing scenarios occurring post OS startup.

Reviewer 2: My thinking is along the same lines wrt to how the `EV_EVENT_TAG` would look like. The alternative could be to have `event_id`s for each `Operation` (i.e., `event_id`  = CoCo base id (aka `Domain`) + op id (aka `Operation`)).

> The Attestation Agent Eventlog ([AAEL](https://github.com/confidential-containers/guest-components/issues/495)) are introduced to address limitations in existing logging frameworks such as [Confidential Computing Eventlog (CCEL)](https://uefi.org/specs/UEFI/2.10/38_Confidential_Computing.html), which primarily focus on capturing events during OS boot-up. Unlike CCEL, AAEL provides a comprehensive format for logging events that occur within Confidential VMs (CVMs) after the operating system has started. These VMs provide a highly secure and isolated environment crucial for protecting sensitive operations. The AAEL standard ensures that these post-OS events, which can include memory operations, network transactions, filesystem operations and container-related activities, etc, are coherently bound to hardware dynamic measurement registers, tying activities within the Confidential VMs to their secure hardware roots. This enables high integrity and verifiability for operations, greatly enhancing the ability to audit, troubleshoot, and respond to security incidents in confidential computing scenarios occurring post OS startup.

Author: We have also considered this. The native TdTcgPcclientTaggedEvent type is not mentioned because using only one tagged_event_id (uint32) to carry the dual semantics of Domain and Operation may collide with other input sources that also use EV_EVENT_TAG.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4c9df54e-67af-4174-ab53-f92784d8ca5a)

Here I also show the architecture diagram of the scenario you mentioned. For users, the upper-level APIs, i.e. the recording side of AA and the verification side of AS, will not change in both solutions, and they are only related to the underlying storage method.

> The Attestation Agent Eventlog ([AAEL](https://github.com/confidential-containers/guest-components/issues/495)) are introduced to address limitations in existing logging frameworks such as [Confidential Computing Eventlog (CCEL)](https://uefi.org/specs/UEFI/2.10/38_Confidential_Computing.html), which primarily focus on capturing events during OS boot-up. Unlike CCEL, AAEL provides a comprehensive format for logging events that occur within Confidential VMs (CVMs) after the operating system has started. These VMs provide a highly secure and isolated environment crucial for protecting sensitive operations. The AAEL standard ensures that these post-OS events, which can include memory operations, network transactions, filesystem operations and container-related activities, etc, are coherently bound to hardware dynamic measurement registers, tying activities within the Confidential VMs to their secure hardware roots. This enables high integrity and verifiability for operations, greatly enhancing the ability to audit, troubleshoot, and respond to security incidents in confidential computing scenarios occurring post OS startup.

Reviewer 2: > other input sources that also use EV_EVENT_TAG.

what do you mean by other input sources? 

> the recording side of AA and the verification side of AS, will not change in both solutions, and they are only related to the underlying storage method.

with the standards based envelope, we don't necessarily need AAEL storage separetely but we can combine the additional `EV_EVENT_TAG` measurements with CCEL and add any special logic needed for the CoCo Operation IDs when parsing the TCG eventlog.

> The Attestation Agent Eventlog ([AAEL](https://github.com/confidential-containers/guest-components/issues/495)) are introduced to address limitations in existing logging frameworks such as [Confidential Computing Eventlog (CCEL)](https://uefi.org/specs/UEFI/2.10/38_Confidential_Computing.html), which primarily focus on capturing events during OS boot-up. Unlike CCEL, AAEL provides a comprehensive format for logging events that occur within Confidential VMs (CVMs) after the operating system has started. These VMs provide a highly secure and isolated environment crucial for protecting sensitive operations. The AAEL standard ensures that these post-OS events, which can include memory operations, network transactions, filesystem operations and container-related activities, etc, are coherently bound to hardware dynamic measurement registers, tying activities within the Confidential VMs to their secure hardware roots. This enables high integrity and verifiability for operations, greatly enhancing the ability to audit, troubleshoot, and respond to security incidents in confidential computing scenarios occurring post OS startup.

Author: > what do you mean by other input sources?

For example, if organizations A and B both want to record some event logs through AAEL, if they use event_id to distinguish domains, then when there is no centralized registry service to assign a specific int value to organization A or B, an independent uint32 value is difficult to uniquely translate into a specific domain/operation pair.

> with the standards based envelope, we don't necessarily need AAEL storage separetely but we can combine the additional EV_EVENT_TAG measurements with CCEL and add any special logic needed for the CoCo Operation IDs when parsing the TCG eventlog.

You are right. If we are allowed to modify the memory area where CCEL is located from the guest, we can store it here. I think this is some implementation details. You may want to ask how to make ITA support scanning of similar events. Currently, we store AAEL as a separate field. If AAEL is encapsulated in TCG2 format, CCEL can be appended in the plug-in code that KBS transfers to ITA.

> The Attestation Agent Eventlog ([AAEL](https://github.com/confidential-containers/guest-components/issues/495)) are introduced to address limitations in existing logging frameworks such as [Confidential Computing Eventlog (CCEL)](https://uefi.org/specs/UEFI/2.10/38_Confidential_Computing.html), which primarily focus on capturing events during OS boot-up. Unlike CCEL, AAEL provides a comprehensive format for logging events that occur within Confidential VMs (CVMs) after the operating system has started. These VMs provide a highly secure and isolated environment crucial for protecting sensitive operations. The AAEL standard ensures that these post-OS events, which can include memory operations, network transactions, filesystem operations and container-related activities, etc, are coherently bound to hardware dynamic measurement registers, tying activities within the Confidential VMs to their secure hardware roots. This enables high integrity and verifiability for operations, greatly enhancing the ability to audit, troubleshoot, and respond to security incidents in confidential computing scenarios occurring post OS startup.

Reviewer 2: > You are right. If we are allowed to modify the memory area where CCEL is located from the guest, we can store it here. I think this is some implementation details. You may want to ask how to make ITA support scanning of similar events. Currently, we store AAEL as a separate field. If AAEL is encapsulated in TCG2 format, CCEL can be appended in the plug-in code that KBS transfers to ITA.

For now the easiest thing to do would be to write binary `EV_EVENT_TAG` AAEL events to CCEL binary (with the zeros stripped first). [ITA knows to parse this binary](https://github.com/confidential-containers/trustee/commit/a96821ae73841b4224cee15422347ff739e91e1b) same as what we do in Trustee. The CCEL memory area is not writable but it could be an itermediate binary blob file.

│                  │                  │                             
│       ┌──────────▼──────────┐       │      ┌─────────────────────┐
│       │                     │       │      │                     │
│       │  Attestation Agent  ├───────┼─────►│ Attestation Service │
│       │                     │       │      │                     │
│       └───┬─────────┬───────┘       │      └─────────────────────┘
│           │         │               │                             
│           │         ▼               │                             
│    Extend │     ┌──────┐            │                             
│           │     │ AAEL │            │                             
│           │     └──────┘            │                             
│     ┌─────▼───────────────────┐     │                             
│     │ Runtime Measurements/PCR│     │                             
│     └─────────────────────────┘     │                             
│                                     │                             
│           Confidential VM           │                             
└─────────────────────────────────────┘                               
```

> In this specification, we provide detailed information on the Attestation Agent Event Log (AAEL) format in confidential computing scenarios.

Author: Yes. It is. If you have read [this comment](https://github.com/confidential-containers/trustee/pull/792#discussion_r2096843544), you will find that AAEL is a concept located above TCG2 (or other eventlogs). If we use TCG2 as the underlying wrapper, ITA can also read it, but it may need further support for parsing specific events to reach the granularity of AS.

> In this specification, we provide detailed information on the Attestation Agent Event Log (AAEL) format in confidential computing scenarios.

Author: In addition, I think ITA has its considerations as a mature commercial product. When the underlying standardized format based on new features such as AAEL is not yet clear (it should be noted that the eventlog maintained by the kernel will definitely be the technical first choice, but if the kernel clearly does not support eventlog, then we have to consider maintaining a TCG2 eventlog file ourselves), some trade-offs may be needed. For the open source community, AAEL can currently provide the logging and log verification capabilities required by CoCo, and it is designed to ensure that it can be compatible in a more appropriate and standardized form in the future, while not affecting the user's experience, which is appropriate.

> In this specification, we provide detailed information on the Attestation Agent Event Log (AAEL) format in confidential computing scenarios.

Reviewer 2: The AAEL based log for the kernel was proposed and rejected. Also, the kernel log was mainly targeted for the RTMR based measurements but I think Trustee will also have to think what's available for TPMs (currently, TCG2 BIOS measurements only which is the same as with CCEL).

One of the pushbacks in the community was that we don't want new standards for the (kernel) log which is something to consider here too.

> In this specification, we provide detailed information on the Attestation Agent Event Log (AAEL) format in confidential computing scenarios.

Reviewer 2: > What may confuse you is that our current code is directly expressed in AAEL and interacts with PCR/RTMR.

I think I'm only confused about the purpose of this PR. Would it make sense to not talk about the log at all and focus on inputs (attestation-agent API) and outputs (token claims) of these measured events?

> In this specification, we provide detailed information on the Attestation Agent Event Log (AAEL) format in confidential computing scenarios.

Author: I added AAEL's support for existing standards, API definitions, and how to bind to underlying dynamic metric registers. At the same time, I think it is necessary to clarify the format of AAEL Entry, ptal

> In this specification, we provide detailed information on the Attestation Agent Event Log (AAEL) format in confidential computing scenarios.

Reviewer 2: OK, thanks. I guess the doc structure is now OK but let me make a few wording suggestions (in a separate review).

Currently, as the kernel does not offer a unified interface for maintaining Eventlogs [1], we have decided to temporarily use the AAEL. 

> Once the kernel releases a unified Eventlog format, we will update the next version of the specification to ensure that the existing AAEL Event Entries are compatible with the new Kernel Eventlog format. We will also strive to minimize any impact on the user experience for existing users.

Author: I hold the same view that users do not care about the underlying format. Users already can have some policy, such as the following if the Domain is set to `github.com/confidential-containers` and Operation is `PullImage`

```rego
tdx["aael"]["github.com/confidential-containers"]["PullImage"] = xxx
```
These are the contents we hope to introduce into the [document](https://github.com/confidential-containers/trustee/blob/main/attestation-service/docs/parsed_claims.md) after defining and standardizing the specific names in this spec.

> Once the kernel releases a unified Eventlog format, we will update the next version of the specification to ensure that the existing AAEL Event Entries are compatible with the new Kernel Eventlog format. We will also strive to minimize any impact on the user experience for existing users.

Author: > It may never do that so perhaps we don't want to give these guarantees.

I think we need an opportunity here. After the kernel clearly does not accept to support Eventlog, we can switch the underlying implementation to TCG's EV_EVENT_TAG. Before that, just keep the status quo.

│           │     └──────┘            │                             
│     ┌─────▼───────────────────┐     │                             
│     │ Runtime Measurements/PCR│     │                             
│     └─────────────────────────┘     │                             
│                                     │                             
│           Confidential VM           │                             
└─────────────────────────────────────┘                               
```

In this specification, we provide detailed information on the Attestation Agent Event Log (AAEL) format in confidential computing scenarios.

Currently, as the kernel does not offer a unified interface for maintaining Eventlogs [1], we have decided to temporarily use the AAEL. 

Once the kernel releases a unified Eventlog format, we will update the next version of the specification to ensure that the existing AAEL Event Entries are compatible with the new Kernel Eventlog format. We will also strive to minimize any impact on the user experience for existing users.

## Specifications

AAEL is a standard for event logging over guest kernel level.

> ### Attestation Agent Event Log (AAEL)

Reviewer 2: perhaps we need to focus documenting on something like:
```suggestion
### Attestation Agent Measured Events API
```

## Architecture

The architecture supporting AAEL seamlessly integrates with existing confidential computing systems,
providing a robust event logging and verification framework above the kernel level within CVMs. The [Attestation Agent (AA)](https://github.com/confidential-containers/guest-components/tree/main/attestation-agent) is integral to this process, recording events within the AAEL framework and securely binding logs to hardware dynamic measurement registers.

It receives logging requests from system components.

These callers record events following the spec-defined AAEL Event, ensuring consistency and reliability in log data.

> The [Attestation Service (AS)](https://github.com/confidential-containers/trustee/tree/main/attestation-service) offers a flexible platform for processing AAEL logs in a generalized manner, ensuring compatibility with various confidential computing environments for diverse event verification.

Author: would it be better to delete `The`?

> Furthermore, AS can conduct detailed analysis and enforce policies for AAEL events, utilizing the AAEL Event Spec for precise validation and scrutiny. This capability supports the development and execution of advanced security policies, enhancing the effectiveness and security of the VM.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Furthermore, AS can conduct detailed analysis and enforce policies for AAEL events, utilizing the AAEL Event Spec for precise validation and scrutiny. This capability supports the development and execution of advanced security policies, enhancing the appraisal of the VM state.
```
